>>Funding for this
program has been
provided by the
Friends of Poetry
and by the Witter Bynner
Foundation for Poetry.
>>In the town of Konya
in central Turkey
in the middle of
the 13th century,
a prominent religious
scholar named
Jalal ad-Din Rumi was suddenly
separated from his teacher
and spiritual friend.
In his grief, he took hold of
a column and began turning.
Verses of poetry began pouring
out of him, remarkable poetry.
His students wrote
the words down.
700 years later,
Rumi's poetry is
being discovered in the West.
He is, in fact, the
bestselling poet in America.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
"Come to the orchard in spring.
There is light and wine and
sweethearts in the pomegranate
flowers.
If you do not come,
these do not matter.
If you do come,
these do not matter."
Rumi was born
September 30, 1207,
near Balkh, Afghanistan,
which was then
part of the Persian Empire.
When Rumi was still
a child, his family
was forced to flee the oncoming
armies of Genghis Khan.
After years of
travel, they settled
in Konya, Turkey, an important
stop on the Silk Road
and a meeting point
of many cultures--
Islamic, Judeo-Christian,
Hindu, and Buddhist.
Rumi's father became the head
of a Sufi learning community.
The Sufis are an
ancient spiritual order,
and according to many Sufis,
the essential truths of Sufism
exist in all religions.
>>The Sufis are
a remarkable band
in the history of religions.
They are the mystics of Islam.
And as the mystics
of Islam, the Sufi
we can connect with,
because they're
talking about these wonderful,
sublime truths which
have a way of piercing directly
into the human heart, wherever
it is.
>>The Sufis used to
walk down several roads,
visiting with the Christians,
visiting with Islam,
visiting in all of the
great religions, really.
I mean, that's part of
the nature of this kind
of fluid imagination.
It crosses boundaries.
It penetrates and
it even slips by,
and it works by way of humor.
It works by way of
stunning imagery.
It works in many
different ways as
if to keep bringing people
to some deep human well.
>>Upon his father's death,
Rumi became the head
of the learning community.
His life seems to have
been a fairly normal one
for a religious
scholar-- teaching,
meditating, helping the poor--
until the late fall of 1244,
when he met a stranger, a
wandering dervish, Shams
of Tabriz.
>>Rumi's genius was triggered
by an actual human being,
an encounter with this
mysterious figure,
Shams of Tabriz.
>>He was an intense,
fierce, mountain meditator.
Those kind of people, like
Thoreau magnified five times.
>>The connection
between Shams and Rumi
is one of the great
stories of learning
and what we nowaday
call mentoring.
But it's almost of an
order beyond what people
mean when they mean
to learn from someone,
because it means to almost--
what seemed to happen
was a sudden knowing.
>>One can see here
in Shams an older man
who is outside the orthodox
spiritual community who
comes in and helps
a younger man who
is deeply embedded in that
orthodox spiritual community.
And then there's a
kind of explosion.
>>What Rumi says, he says, he
was raw, then he got cooked.
And then he was burned.
And that means when his heart
only melted through his love
for Shams, that this
new experience enabled
him to understand what he
was talking about before.
>>And he took Rumi's
book knowledge and says,
now, you have to live what
you've been reading about.
Pushed all his books
into the fountain,
that's one story
of how they met.
And Rumi and he went off
into this practice called
conversation, or sohbet,
in which they disappeared
for evidently for
weeks at a time
in this conversation between
the personal and the deep self.
>>So this is the poem "I'm
Not Saying This Right,"
which, of course, might
mean that I might not
say the poem right.
So I'm not saying this right.
"You bind me, and I
tear away in a rage
to open out into air, a
round brightness, a candle
point, all reason, all love.
This confusing
joy is your doing,
this hangover your
tender thought.
You turn to look, I turn.
I'm not saying this right.
I'm a jailed crazy who
ties up spirit women.
No, I'm Solomon.
What goes, come back.
What goes comes back.
Come back.
We never left each other.
A disbeliever hides
all disbelief.
But I will say his secret now.
More and more awake,
getting up at night,
spinning and falling
in love with Shams,
falling with love for Shams,
spinning and spinning.
Falling in love with Shams.
Falling with love for Shams.
Falling with love for Shams."
>>And so Rumi became a poet
then, became a real poet,
became infused.
The whole spirit came into him.
And so that's one of the great
love affairs of the world,
the one between Shams and Rumi.
And they loved each
other, not sexually,
but they loved each
other in the heart.
>>Why does it impress
people so much?
Because it's a love
that is beyond gender,
beyond age, beyond
sex, beyond species.
It is the essence of love.
>>Two oceans met each other
in the force of love of God,
because the earth
has many oceans.
All the time, they meet.
And ones happened to meet in
the land of Konya, Turkey,
700 years ago.
>>"When you feel your lips
becoming infinite and sweet
like a moon in a sky, when you
feel that spaciousness inside,
Shams of Tabriz
will be there, too.
Something opens our wings.
Something makes boredom
and hurt disappear.
Someone fills the
cup in front of us.
We taste only sacredness."
>>The relationship
between Rumi and Shams
is actually a reminder to us
that all relationships have
that potential and that
when we fall in love,
then we actually are entering a
spiritual domain of awareness.
Romantic lovers are confused.
That's a very spiritual
state, to be confused.
Rumi says himself.
He says, label me and
define me, and you'll
starve yourself of yourself.
Nail me down in a
box with cold words,
and that box will
be your coffin.
Because I don't know who I am.
I'm in astounding,
lucid confusion.
That's the state of love.
>>There was a lot of jealousy
among Rumi's students
over this.
Jealousy is one of the main
impulses in the human race,
you know.
So no one knows
exactly the truth,
but some feel that what happened
is that the students killed
Shams, hid the body.
Rumi then went out
in the backyard,
and there was a pole there.
And in his grief, he kept
going round and round
and round and round the pole,
and this is the beginning
of the whirling dervishes.
Well, it was done
out of grief, which
is terrifically interesting.
That's how all that
great poetry started,
was in grief, the thing
that we avoid the most, hmm?
And in that time, he would
begin to speak the lines,
speak them out.
They'd all appear in rhyme
and meter, perfectly done.
And then when he came out, the
students would say, oh, my god.
That was tremendous.
Write that down.
No, he said.
No, let's keep dancing.
Let's go.
That's only words.
>>Rumi says that everything
is for the beloved.
Everything is for the friend.
And my understanding
of that is that there
is a presence that
we feel in the beauty
that we see outside of us.
We feel it in a November sunset.
We feel it in a child
sleeping, in a child dancing,
playing soccer.
We feel it in a group of friends
making supper on Sunday night.
He would say that feeling
is a presence that
is both outside of us and
tending us and inside us.
When we feel the
jewel-like quality
of our own inner awareness,
that also is the friend.
And this inner outer presence
is addressed directly
in many of Rumi's poems.
When he says that
wonderful pronoun "you"
and you don't quite know who
it is, it's that presence.
"When it's cold and raining," he
says, "you are more beautiful,
and the snow brings me
even closer to your lips.
The inner secret, that
which was never born.
You are that freshness,
and I am with you now.
I can't explain the
goings or the comings.
You enter suddenly,
and I am nowhere again,
inside the majesty."
"I. You.
He.
She.
We.
In the garden of
mystical lovers,
these are not true distinctions.
I. You.
He.
She.
We."
>>I feel very grateful
to Coleman Barks
for having introduced me to
a world that I knew existed,
that I yearned
for, that there was
an agony of wishing
in my heart, but I
didn't know how to find it.
I had found it through other
means, through other poets,
but never with the intensity
and passion of Rumi.
So I owe a great
debt of gratitude
to Coleman Barks to
bringing me to that world.
>>We know Rumi
through his poetry.
But in a sense, it
isn't his poetry,
because his poetry
was in Persian, Farsi,
and we read him in English.
And the difficulties,
the problems,
also the mysterious
connection that
occurs, but also a
distance in translation,
is an abiding factor
for all translators,
but especially for poets.
>>The first time I
ever heard of Rumi
was at one of Robert
Bly's conferences
in 1976 when he handed me a
book of scholarly translations
by AJ Arberry and he
said, these-- these poems
need to be released from
their cages, you know.
And so I began rephrasing
Arberry's English.
And in the course of that,
a sequence of coincidences
happened, and I met a Sufi
teacher, Bawa Muhaiyaddeen.
And he told me to do this work.
And if I had not sat in his
presence for about nine years
on and off, I would have
no idea what Rumi was about
or what he did.
>>I believe in both
translations and versions.
In a translation,
one has to know
the language-- for
example, Spanish
when you translate Neruda.
And then Neruda's contemporary,
and so you can feel the turns.
And you can feel the sorrow,
where it is in the sentence,
and which words have tremendous
sorrow, even in Spanish,
and continue them.
And then you follow the
emotional mood of that line.
And then as a translator, I'm
responsible for the accuracy.
I still may make many mistakes.
I will always find a speaker
who knew Spanish and English
in the cradle, because that's
where the sounds are first
heard.
A version is a
different thing for me.
I found Kabir.
I thought they were so
fantastic that I thought, well,
what did this sound like
if it were written today?
So I made a guess at the lines.
And they're not accurate.
You're making a guess.
You're bringing it
up to modern times.
You're putting in, so-- but
the aim of those translations,
the aim of versions, is
bringing in poets so unusual, so
amazing, that you'd rather
have an inaccurate translation
than none at all.
>>Well, I work with scholars
who give me literal versions
of poems from the Persian.
The more literal,
the better for me.
So John Moyne and evidently
Reynold Nicholson's translation
of the "Masnavi"
is very literal.
I take what they give me,
which is literal English,
and then try to make a poem
that's valid in American right
now.
So I put it into
our tradition which
is most attuned to
spiritual questions,
and that is the free
verse of Whitman
and Emily Dickinson
and Gary Snyder.
In terms of the
musicality of the Persian,
we don't try to
reproduce that at all.
It's densely rhymed within words
and within the middle words,
and that's almost
unreproducible in English.
>>[SPEAKING PERSIAN]
I don't know.
It's quite difficult to
understand, and easy as well.
>>The more translators
work on a text, the better.
Because every version
gives you something else,
because it's through the
eye of that particular poet
or translator.
He sees more this word
or more that version.
>>But somehow, the cork comes
out of the bottle again,
and the genie is
out, so to speak.
You know, a reference to an
old story where it's uncorked
and the spirit of the
thing comes to life again,
which has certainly happened
through Coleman Barks, Robert
Bly, and the other translators.
>>Rumi can keep and should
keep a lot of translators busy,
because he is a kind of universe
with a lot of different moods
and modes, and I may be
missing a lot of them.
>>This is the story
told by the reed.
[SPEAKING PERSIAN]
Or [SPEAKING PERSIAN]
>>No, there is no "as."
There is not any "as."
>>Oh, there is no "as."
>>[SPEAKING PERSIAN]
>>Oh, [SPEAKING PERSIAN]
I was born in Afghanistan,
the land where Rumi came from.
When I was a little
girl, my father,
I remember him reading
Rumi or conversing
through Rumi with his
friends in the moonlight
until 2 or 3 o'clock
in the morning.
I connected back to Rumi
after my father passed away,
actually.
>>[SPEAKING PERSIAN]
>>I went and found and bought a
nice book of Rumi's "Masnavi,"
and I came home and
I started reading it.
I realized that this
is not something
that I can do by myself.
>>"Who has not this
love, it's nothing."
>>"It's nothing."
>>Right.
>>Like a wind.
>>Yeah.
>>Might as well die.
>>Exactly.
>>[SPEAKING PERSIAN]
I knew I needed a teacher, so
I found Zahra through friends.
And it's been really
wonderful working
with her, somebody who has
the knowledge of the poetry
and Rumi and the culture.
>>>>[PERSIAN], but it
doesn't quite mean--
it's a metaphor for--
>>It's wine, but it means
it's just all about love.
>>She's a very
tough teacher, yes.
You have to do it
right, you know.
You can't deviate.
Or maybe I should say
it's the Afghan way.
It was the same
way back home, too.
>>"Listen to the story told by
the reed of being separated.
Since I was cut
from the reed bed,
I have made this crying sound.
Anyone apart from someone she
loves understands what I say.
Anyone pulled from a
source longs to go back."
>>Rumi, the dominant
node in his poetry is,
of course, longing, the longing
of the soul for the divine.
His favorite image for
this was the reed flute.
That flute is noted for the
plaintive sound that it makes.
>>And the reed was played
on by human beings,
but the reed was once in
the mud of the river bottom.
Then it was pulled out.
So it carries with it
the grief of having once
been in the river bottom
and now just in the air.
And he said, all of us were
once in the mud of God.
We have now been pulled out.
So every time someone
plays or does any poem,
it'll always have
in it that grief
of having lost the mud
of the river bed of God.
>>"A craftsman pulled a
reed from the reed bed,
cut holes in it, and
called it a human being.
Since then, it's been wailing
a tender agony of parting,
never mentioning the skill
that gave it life as a flute."
Boy, that changes the whole idea
of being a victim in the world.
It changes the entire
suggestion of what
the lament of being
alive is about,
the tender agony of parting.
We live parted from something.
That's great.
>>You know, he says, the
reed can't make the noise,
can't make the reed music,
can't make the flute music
until it is plucked
from the reed bed
and carved with nine
holes like the human body.
And then it can make
language when it's separated.
Therefore, language is a
proof that we're separated.
The fact that we
use language is part
of our nostalgia for union.
>>Every soul has their
own broken heart,
because if the
soul is not united,
the essence of it, of itself,
of course, has broken hearts.
>>Love is the goal
of all other goals.
You know, some time
ago, I read something.
Some Nobel laureate
won the prize.
And he said, you know, this
is a consolation prize.
I was looking for love.
>>"In the early
morning hour just
before dawn, lover and beloved
wake and take a drink of water.
She asks, 'Do you love
me or yourself more?
Really, tell the
absolute truth.' He says,
'There's nothing left of me.
I'm like a ruby held
up to the sunrise.
Is it still a stone, or
a world made of redness?
It has no resistance to
sunlight.' This is how Hallaj
said I am God and
told the truth.
The ruby and the
sunrise are one.
Be courageous, and
discipline yourself.
Completely become
hearing and ear,
and wear this sun
ruby as an earring.
Work.
Keep digging your well.
Don't think about
getting off from work.
Water is there somewhere.
Submit to a daily practice.
Your loyalty to that
is a ring on the door.
Keep knocking,
and the joy inside
will eventually open
a window and look out
to see who's there."
>>"At the time of night
prayer, as the sun slides down,
the route the senses
walk on closes.
The route to the
invisible opens.
The angel of sleep then gathers
and drives along the spirits,
just as the mountain
keeper gathers his sheep
on the slope."
That's the image.
"And what amazing sights
he offers to the descending
sheep-- cities with
sparkling streets,
hyacinth gardens,
emerald pastures.
The spirits see
astounding beings.
Turtles turn to men,
men turn to angels,
when sleep erases the banal.
I think one could say
that the spirit goes back
to his old home.
It no longer remembers
where it lives,
and it loses its fatigue.
It carries around in
life so many griefs
and loads and trembles
under their weight.
They are gone.
It's all well."
It's all well.
All right, so that's lovely.
>>In the Sufi
orders, the one that
was generated by Rumi,
the levy Mevlevi Order,
their distinctive ritual
is a circling motion
which has caused those Sufis
to be called the Whirling
Dervishes.
And it comes from
Rumi himself, who
found himself drawn to a circle
of pillars in his mosque.
He would cup his hand around
a pillar and lean back
and found that that
motion for some-- who
knows what the symbolism is?
Maybe planets circling
the sun-- would just
release a torrent
of ecstatic poetry.
And much of his poetry just
came spilling out of him
in that motion.
Now that took hold,
and his followers
developed a similar
ritual of circling.
In their case, their sheik
rather than a pillar.
>>"The secret turning in
us makes the universe turn.
Head unaware of
feet, and feet head.
Neither cares.
They keep turning.
The secret turning in us
makes the universe turn."
It's an image of surrender and
discipline at the same time.
If you've seen it
done, you see that.
They go, and then they
just open and flower out,
and they never fall.
They're always in
total synchrony,
and they know where they are.
They're in concert with the
galaxies and the molecules
and all these things
that go like this.
That's what I've always
loved about the Sufis.
They say that the
great world is inside.
This world that looks
so huge and magnificent
is the microcosm.
The macrocosm is our inner life.
It just reverses science.
Or maybe the new science is
saying something like that.
The inner world
is the giant place
and the world, the
outside world that we see,
is the language that we
use to speak of the inner.
>>If you look deeply
enough, actually,
into the heart of
science itself,
we might discover that what
Rumi and other great seers
and sages and the wisdom
traditions were saying
was actually true.
At the heart of
creation, there is
only that feel of love, that
ultimately even our material
success comes from the ability
to love and have compassion,
comes from the capacity to
experience joy and ecstasy
and share it with others.
>>"Inside water, a
water wheel turns.
A star circulates with the moon.
We live in this night
ocean, wondering.
What are these lights?
I am so small, I
can barely be seen.
How can this great
love be inside me?
Look at your eyes.
They're small, but they
see enormous things."
>>Rumi says, "On
resurrection day,
your body testifies against you.
Your hand says, 'I
stole money.' Your lips,
'I said meanness.' Your feet,
'I went were I shouldn't.' Your
genitals, 'Me, too.' These
voices will make your praying
sound hypocritical, so let the
body's doings speak openly now
without your saying a word,
as a student walking behind
a teacher says, 'This one
knows more clearly than I
the way.'" That's an
amazing thing at the end,
that your body in certain ways
knows your way to the spirit
better than your mind does.
And the body forgives
a great deal, you know?
>>Rumi gives the way to
live better, to love more,
to be more comfortable
in this world.
That you have a lot of
difficulties for everything,
but with Rumi, you
feel more safe.
You love it.
You see the world in the
other ways, with love,
and it opens your eyes.
>>Ready?
OK.
"Inside water, a
water wheel turns.
A star circulates with the moon.
We live in the night
ocean, wondering.
What are these lights?
You have said what you are.
I am what I am.
Your actions in my head, my head
here in my hands with something
circling inside.
I have no name for what
circles so perfectly."
Yeah, yeah.
I heard a Sufi say once-- he
asked me what religion I was,
and I just threw up my hands.
You know, I don't know.
He said, that's good.
The universe is--
love is the religion,
and the universe is the book.
So just read it,
your experience.
>>Yes.
The signs of God
are in the world,
and the world is in your heart.
>>Yeah.
But I love books.
>>The manuscript of nature.
Inayat Khan talks about the
sacred manuscript of nature
is the only scripture.
>>Yeah.
Some of us are just
hooked on books, you know?
"Spring, and everything
outside is growing.
Even the tall cypress tree.
We must not leave this place.
Around the lip of the cup
we share, these words.
My life is not mine.
If someone were to
play music--" OK, OK.
>>I couldn't hear my bayan
in there for some reason very
much--
>>I'll tell you a little story
about my granddaughter, Briony.
Here she is.
This is the beloved.
We have an organization
that we belong to,
Briony and I. It's called Club.
And we meet every Monday
night after dinner,
and we do science experiments,
and we draw pictures.
And one day, we were going up
to her room in the new house
that they're going
to move in to soon,
and there's nothing in that
room but just an office desk.
Some students had been
renting out the house,
and there's just this
metal office desk.
And we were going
to sit on the floor
there and draw
pictures for Club.
And she reached into
the desk and pulled off
a bit of adding machine
tape and ripped it off,
and she said,
Granddaddy, this is
your permanent ticket to club.
I said, I never had a
permanent ticket before.
So I put it in my pocket.
And while we were
drawing pictures,
I pulled it out
and noticed that it
had this very careful
calligraphy on it.
And it turns out that
adding machine roll,
some student had copied out
the entire book, every poem
in "Birdsong," these little
poems on the adding machine
roll.
And she had ripped that off,
the first three and 1/2 poems,
and given it to me as my
permanent ticket to Club.
>>There's this old
Celtic thing that there's
very little difference
between a song and a poem,
between a poem and a story,
between a story and a prayer.
So that any time someone
is singing a song
or telling a story or telling
or reading poetry to a child,
they're also inviting
the child into a prayer.
And there's never
a need to take that
down to the level
of the child at all,
because something in the
child already knows all this
and is waiting to hear it again.
So that parents or teachers that
give great poetry or stories
to children are feeding this
old soul that's in the child
and are reassuring
the child that they've
come to the right world.
That, yes, it may be
confusing, and the world
may be increasingly chaotic,
but this is the world
where those words are said.
>>I think if we
bring back poetry
into the lives of children,
we will transform the world.
We look for all
kinds of solutions
for our everyday problems.
Most of the solutions
are purely materialistic.
You know, if you
want to take care
of the elderly, better
old folks' homes
with more money in them.
If you want to take
care of inner cities,
pour in the funds over
there, and it'll solve.
That's not the
crisis of our age.
And even if we do see
poverty over there,
that's the expression of
a deeper impoverishment,
and that impoverishment is the
soul and the spirit screaming
for nourishment.
And that nourishment
can come from poetry.
Poetry, as TS Eliot said, is
a raid on the inarticulate.
>>On the level of 1
to 10, it's about a 2
to read great works on
the spirit from the page.
On a level of 1 to
10, it's like a 9
to hear a human being speak
it, especially one you love.
That brings the spirit inside
the house, inside the family,
inside your genetic line.
Mmm, it's gorgeous.
Fantastic.
So I would rather have
someone read to my children
three poems than for them
to read 30 on the page.
>>To read a poem
privately is a beautiful--
can be a devotional,
prayerful thing.
But to have the poem
fall on the drum
of the ear, that's different.
Etheridge Knight, the great
African-American poet,
used to say, the
words from my mouth
are beating on the
drum in your ear.
So don't think this is casual.
>>I don't know why he should
come back and be so prevalent
700 years from his lifetime.
It may be a simple thing.
It may be it's because he's
telling a truth that we
are ready to hear.
And he tells it so clearly
and with such gentleness
and with such elegant
images that we
delight to hear his stories.
>>When something is true, it
can live 700 years or more.
We read Homer or we read
people who are older than Rumi,
and their beauty is just as
new today as it was then.
>>We're hard to understand
for ordinary people.
But they can feel the smell, the
fragrance, or feel the touch.
Another saying that's a
connection with the soul.
Even 700 years later, they
can touch the human hearts.
And they do, and they will.
>>Rumi is like bread.
It's not like
caviar that you can
have it once a while
or never in your life.
But Rumi, like a bread,
you will have it once,
twice, three times, four
times, five times, all day, OK?
And then for that, you pass
really every day with Rumi,
not once a day.
I pass now as well.
I pass maybe two hours, three
hours, like this with Rumi,
and I feel in paradise.
I fly with Rumi.
I go to the sky.
I will forget that
I'm on the earth.
>>He said, I go into
the Christian church,
and I go into the
Muslim mosque, and I
go into the Jewish synagogue,
and I see one altar.
He saw a single
impulse to worship
at the core of all religions.
When he died, members
of every faith in Konya
came to his funeral
honoring him,
as they felt a way of
deepening into their own faith.
>>That is the reason
everyone was there.
Maybe every nation, they
love their own prophets.
Every order, they
like their own sheiks.
But everyone loved
Mawlawi Jalal ad-Din Rumi.
>>He says, "I'm not Christian,
not Jew, not Muslim, not Hindu,
not Buddhist."
He says, "I belong
to the beloved.
I have seen the
two worlds as one,
and that one call to and know
first, last, outer, inner, only
that breath-breathing
human being."
"This we have now
is not imagination.
This is not grief or
joy, not a judging state
or an elation or a sadness.
Those come and go.
This is the presence
that doesn't.
It's dawn, Husam, here
in the splendor of coral,
inside the friend, in the simple
truth of what Hallaj said.
What else could
human beings want?
When grapes turn to wine,
they're wanting this.
When the night sky pours by,
it's really a crowd of beggars,
and they all want some of this.
This that we are now created
the body cell by cell,
like bees building a honeycomb.
The universe and the human
body grew from this, not this
from the universe
and the human body.
This that we have now
is not imagination.
This is not grief or
joy, not a judging state
or an elation or a sadness.
Those come and go.
This is the presence
that doesn't.
It's dawn, Husam.
What else could
human beings want?"
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Funding for this
program has been
provided by the
Friends of Poetry
and by the Witter Bynner
Foundation for Poetry.